<a href="https://www.quora.com/Why-does-Facebook-have-so-much-of-their-source-code-in-1-giant-git-repo-did-they-not-think-that-this-approach-wont-scale/answer/Steven-Grimm">https://www.quora.com/Why-does-Facebook-have-so-much-of-their-source-code-in-1-giant-git-repo-did-they-not-think-that-this-approach-wont-scale/answer/Steven-Grimm</a><div id="articleHeader"><h1>(2) Steven Grimm's answer to Why does Facebook have so much of their source code in 1 giant git repo, did they not think that this approach won't scale?</h1></div>Evan is right that there isn't just one big repository, and Ben is right that there are good reasons to keep the number of repositories low. I'll add one more thought:<br /><br />It's far preferable to organize one's projects to maximize productivity for the developers of those projects, rather than being forced into less productive configurations by tool limitations. It's so preferable that spending time bending the tools to the needs of the project is, even if sustained work is required over the long term, a net savings over bending the project to meet the needs of the tools.<br /><br />To put some numbers on that, say Facebook were to split its frontend code base up into a bunch of smaller repositories. If this cost each engineer 5 minutes a week in added glitchiness or occasional race conditions from someone else committing interdependent changes to multiple repositories (I think the real cost would likely be higher, but let's stay conservative), then over an engineering team of 500 people (Facebook has more than this, but let's stay conservative here too) that's 41 hours a week in lost productivity. In other words, you end up spending <i>less</i> engineering time by having a full-time 40-hour-a-week engineer doing nothing but keeping the version control system up to snuff on the single large repository. The numbers get increasingly compelling as the size of the team grows. Not only that, you make the tools less annoying to the engineers; glitchy or inconvenient tool chains are a big source of developer stress.<br /><br />Plus, of course, many of the changes being proposed to git are one-shot improvements that will continue to provide value forever with little or no ongoing time investment, and that will, once contributed back to the open-source community, make the tools that much better for everyone.