<a href="https://gist.github.com/paulirish/12fb951a8b893a454b32">https://gist.github.com/paulirish/12fb951a8b893a454b32</a><div id="articleHeader"><h1>bling.js</h1></div>
<p>Because you want the $ of jQuery without the jQuery.</p>
<hr />
<p>You may be interested in bling.js if you get tired of the <code>[].slice.call( document.querySelectorAll('.foo'), function(){ …</code> rodeo. It does this:</p>
<div><pre>// forEach over the qSA result, directly.
document.querySelectorAll('input').forEach(el =&gt; /* ... */);

// on() rather than addEventListener()
document.body.on('dblclick', evt =&gt; /* ... */);

// classic $ + on()
$('p').on('click', el =&gt; /* ... */);</pre></div>
<p>It doesn't do anything else. This is <strong>not</strong> a jQuery equivalent.</p>
<h4>Notes:</h4>
<ul>
<li><code>on()</code> works on elements, <code>document</code>, <code>window</code>, and results from <code>querySelector</code> & <code>querySelectorAll</code>.</li>
<li><code>$</code> is qSA so if you're grabbing a single element you'll have to <code>[0]</code> it.</li>
<li>Bling plays well with authoring ES6</li>
<li>Resig explored this stuff a while ago: <a href="http://github.com/jeresig/nodelist" target="_blank">github.com/jeresig/nodelist</a></li>
<li>Bling doesn't work on Android 2.3 or iOS 5.0. Works everywhere else including IE8 (assuming Function.bind)</li>
</ul>
<h4>Nerdy implementation notes:</h4>
<ul>
<li>The NodeList prototype usually inherits from Object, so we move it to Array.</li>
<li>I'm curious how ES6/7 would let a NodeList be iterable and inherit from EventTarget</li>
<li>Setting <code>Node.prototype.on = EventTarget.prototype.addEventListener</code> is awesome. It works in Chrome/FF but not yet in IE/Safari.</li>
<li>I haven't set up any off() or trigger() to map to <code>dispatchEvent</code> & <code>removeEventListener</code>. I'm OK with that.</li>
<li>I'm using <a href="https://github.com/Flet/semistandard" target="_blank">semi-standard</a> for style. I tried standard sans-semicolons, but can't get used to it.</li>
</ul>
