<a href="https://www.quora.com/How-does-ElasticSearch-make-money-ElasticSearch-is-a-complex-piece-of-software-and-its-open-sourced-Where-does-the-author-find-the-time-or-money-to-work-on-it">https://www.quora.com/How-does-ElasticSearch-make-money-ElasticSearch-is-a-complex-piece-of-software-and-its-open-sourced-Where-does-the-author-find-the-time-or-money-to-work-on-it</a><div id="articleHeader"><h1>How does ElasticSearch make money? ElasticSearch is a complex piece of software, and it's open-sourced. Where does the author find the time or money to work on it?</h1></div>Shay, the creator of Elasticsearch, is hardly alone anymore.  After raising a total of about $35 million from the investment community, some of the leading devs in the field have joined the firm.  I've noticed that many of the top contributors to Solr, in fact, now work for Elasticsearch.  This tells you something about the directions of those projects.<br /><br />But, to answer your question, the company makes money by selling professional support contracts to large enterprises.  These would be similar contracts to, say for example, Red Hat's professional support of Red Hat Enterprise Linux, another open source product.  MongoDB (formerly 10gen) does the same thing.  Cloudera and Hortonworks deploy this model for the Hadoop eco-system.  Datastax does so for Cassandra.  It's not a terribly unique business model, even though the technology is itself chock full of awesomeness.<br /><br />They also sell professional training.  There is no certification yet.<br /><br />Presumably, if that $35 million investment bought somewhere between a quarter and a third of the company, the private markets are valuing the company into the 9 figures.  Considering that the team behind Elasticsearch is largely made up of former Springsource executives (acquired for a mid-9 figure sum by VMWare), it seems like a solid investment.<br /><br />(If you appreciated this answer, I could use the upvote... and if you are interested in a <a href="http://qbox.io" target="_blank">Hosted Elasticsearch</a> solution, click on the link).